



Network Working Group                                         M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Standards Track                             R. Hamilton
Expires: November 25, 2016                                        Google
                                                            May 24, 2016


          Using Transport Layer Security (TLS) to Secure QUIC
                     draft-thomson-quic-tls-latest

Abstract

   This document describes how Transport Layer Security (TLS) can be
   used to secure QUIC.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 25, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Notational Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Protocol Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Handshake Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  TLS in Stream 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  Handshake and Setup Sequence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  QUIC Record Protection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Key Phases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Retransmission of TLS Handshake Messages  . . . . . . . .   9
     4.3.  QUIC Key Expansion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     4.4.  QUIC AEAD application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.5.  Sequence Number Reconstruction  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Pre-handshake QUIC Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.1.  Unprotected Frames Prior to Handshake Completion  . . . .  13
       5.1.1.  STREAM Frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       5.1.2.  ACK Frames  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       5.1.3.  WINDOW_UPDATE Frames  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       5.1.4.  FEC Packets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.2.  Denial of Service with Unprotected Packets  . . . . . . .  14
     5.3.  Use of 0-RTT Keys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.4.  Protected Frames Prior to Handshake Completion  . . . . .  16
   6.  QUIC-Specific Additions to the TLS Handshake  . . . . . . . .  17
     6.1.  Protocol and Version Negotiation  . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     6.2.  QUIC Extension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     6.3.  Source Address Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     7.1.  Packet Reflection Attack Mitigation . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     7.2.  Peer Denial of Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20

1.  Introduction

   QUIC [I-D.tsvwg-quic-protocol] provides a multiplexed transport for
   HTTP [RFC7230] semantics that provides several key advantages over
   HTTP/1.1 [RFC7230] or HTTP/2 [RFC7540] over TCP [RFC0793].

   This document describes how QUIC can be secured using Transport Layer
   Security (TLS) version 1.3 [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13].  TLS 1.3 provides
   critical latency improvements for connection establishment over
   previous versions.  Absent packet loss, most new connections can be
   established and secured within a single round trip; on subsequent



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   connections between the same client and server, the client can often
   send application data immediately, that is, zero round trip setup.

   This document describes how the standardized TLS 1.3 can act a
   security component of QUIC.  The same design could work for TLS 1.2,
   though few of the benefits QUIC provides would be realized due to the
   handshake latency in versions of TLS prior to 1.3.

1.1.  Notational Conventions

   The words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" are used in this
   document.  It's not shouting; when they are capitalized, they have
   the special meaning defined in [RFC2119].

2.  Protocol Overview

   QUIC [I-D.tsvwg-quic-protocol] can be separated into several modules:

   1.   The basic frame envelope describes the common packet layout.
        This layer includes connection identification, version
        negotiation, and includes the indicators that allow the framing,
        public reset, and FEC modules to be identified.

   2.   The public reset is an unprotected frame that allows an
        intermediary (an entity that is not part of the security
        context) to request the termination of a QUIC connection.

   3.   Version negotiation frames are used to agree on a common version
        of QUIC to use.

   4.   The forward error correction (FEC) module provides redundant
        entropy that allows for frames to be repaired in event of loss.

   5.   Framing comprises most of the QUIC protocol.  Framing provides a
        number of different types of frame, each with a specific
        purpose.  Framing supports frames for both congestion management
        and stream multiplexing.  Framing additionally provides a
        liveness testing capability (the PING frame).

   6.   Encryption provides confidentiality and integrity protection for
        frames.  All frames are protected based on keying material
        derived from the TLS connection running on stream 1.  Prior to
        this, data is protected with the 0-RTT keys.

   7.   Multiplexed streams are the primary payload of QUIC.  These
        provide reliable, in-order delivery of data and are used to
        carry the encryption handshake and transport parameters (stream
        1), HTTP header fields (stream 3), and HTTP requests and



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


        responses.  Frames for managing multiplexing include those for
        creating and destroying streams as well as flow control and
        priority frames.

   8.   Congestion management includes packet acknowledgment and other
        signal required to ensure effective use of available link
        capacity.

   9.   A complete TLS connection is run on stream 1.  This includes the
        entire TLS record layer.  As the TLS connection reaches certain
        states, keying material is provided to the QUIC encryption layer
        for protecting the remainder of the QUIC traffic.

   10.  HTTP mapping provides an adaptation to HTTP that is based on
        HTTP/2.

   The relative relationship of these components are pictorally
   represented in Figure 1.

      +-----+------+
      | TLS | HTTP |
      +-----+------+------------+
      |  Streams   | Congestion |
      +------------+------------+
      |        Frames           |
      +            +------------+
      |            |    FEC     +--------+---------+
      +   +--------+------------+ Public | Version |
      |   |     Encryption      | Reset  |  Nego.  |
      +---+---------------------+--------+---------+
      |                   Envelope                 |
      +--------------------------------------------+
      |                     UDP                    |
      +--------------------------------------------+

                         Figure 1: QUIC Structure

   This document defines the cryptographic parts of QUIC.  This includes
   the handshake messages that are exchanged on stream 1, plus the
   record protection that is used to encrypt and authenticate all other
   frames.

2.1.  Handshake Overview

   TLS 1.3 provides two basic handshake modes of interest to QUIC:






Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   o  A full handshake in which the client is able to send application
      data after one round trip and the server immediately after
      receiving the first message from the client.

   o  A 0-RTT handshake in which the client uses information about the
      server to send immediately.  This data can be replayed by an
      attacker so it MUST NOT carry a self-contained trigger for any
      non-idempotent action.

   A simplified TLS 1.3 handshake with 0-RTT application data is shown
   in Figure 2, see [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13] for more options and details.

       Client                                             Server

       ClientHello
      (Finished)
      (0-RTT Application Data)
      (end_of_early_data)        -------->
                                                     ServerHello
                                            {EncryptedExtensions}
                                            {ServerConfiguration}
                                                    {Certificate}
                                              {CertificateVerify}
                                                       {Finished}
                                <--------      [Application Data]
      {Finished}                -------->

      [Application Data]        <------->      [Application Data]

                    Figure 2: TLS Handshake with 0-RTT

   Two additional variations on this basic handshake exchange are
   relevant to this document:

   o  The server can respond to a ClientHello with a HelloRetryRequest,
      which adds an additional round trip prior to the basic exchange.
      This is needed if the server wishes to request a different key
      exchange key from the client.  HelloRetryRequest is also used to
      verify that the client is correctly able to receive packets on the
      address it claims to have (see Section 6.3).

   o  A pre-shared key mode can be used for subsequent handshakes to
      avoid public key operations.  This is the basis for 0-RTT data,
      even if the remainder of the connection is protected by a new
      Diffie-Hellman exchange.






Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


3.  TLS in Stream 1

   QUIC completes its cryptographic handshake on stream 1, which means
   that the negotiation of keying material happens after the QUIC
   protocol has started.  This simplifies the use of TLS since QUIC is
   able to ensure that the TLS handshake packets are delivered reliably
   and in order.

   QUIC Stream 1 carries a complete TLS connection.  This includes the
   TLS record layer in its entirety.  QUIC provides for reliable and in-
   order delivery of the TLS handshake messages on this stream.

   Prior to the completion of the TLS handshake, QUIC frames can be
   exchanged.  However, these frames are not authenticated or
   confidentiality protected.  Section 5 covers some of the implications
   of this design and limitations on QUIC operation during this phase.

   Once complete, QUIC frames and forward error control (FEC) messages
   are protected using QUIC record protection, see Section 4.

3.1.  Handshake and Setup Sequence

   The integration of QUIC with a TLS handshake is shown in more detail
   in Figure 3.  QUIC "STREAM" frames on stream 1 carry the TLS
   handshake.  QUIC is responsible for ensuring that the handshake
   packets are re-sent in case of loss and that they can be ordered
   correctly.
























Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


       Client                                             Server

      QUIC STREAM Frame(s) <1>:
        ClientHello
          + QUIC Setup Parameters
                               -------->
    ! 0-RTT Key Available

      (QUIC STREAM Frame(s) <1>:)
        ({Finished})
      (Replayable QUIC Frames <any stream>)
                               -------->
                                              0-RTT Key Available !

                                         (QUIC STREAM Frame <1>:)
                                                  (ServerHello)
                                         ({Handshake Messages})
                               <--------
                                              1-RTT Key Available !

                                                [QUIC Frames/FEC]
                               <--------
      (QUIC STREAM Frame(s) <1>:)
        ((end_of_early_data <1>))
        ({Finished})
                               -------->
    ! 1-RTT Key Available

      [QUIC Frames/FEC]        <------->        [QUIC Frames/FEC]

                     Figure 3: QUIC over TLS Handshake

   In Figure 3, symbols mean:

   o  "<" and ">" enclose stream numbers.

   o  "!" indicates when keying material is available.

   o  "(" and ")" enclose messages that are protected with QUIC or TLS
      0-RTT keys.  If 0-RTT is not possible, or not accepted, then
      regular frames protected by this keys are not sent by the client,
      and the server sends its handshake messages without protection.

   o  "{" and "}" enclose messages that are protected by the TLS
      Handshake keys.  Note that the client's 0-RTT Finished message is
      protected by the QUIC 0-RTT key, plus the TLS 0-RTT handshake key.





Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   o  "[" and "]" enclose messages that are protected by the QUIC 1-RTT
      keys.

4.  QUIC Record Protection

   QUIC provides a record protection layer that is responsible for
   authenticated encryption of packets.  The record protection layer
   uses keys provided by the TLS connection and authenticated encryption
   to

   Different keys are used for QUIC and TLS record protection.  Having
   separate QUIC and TLS record protection means that TLS records can be
   protected by two different keys.  This redundancy is maintained for
   the sake of simplicity.

4.1.  Key Phases

   The transition to use of a new QUIC key occurs immediately after
   sending the TLS handshake messages that produced the key transition.
   Every time that a new set of keys is used for protecting outbound
   messages, the KEY_PHASE bit in the public flags is toggled.  The
   KEY_PHASE bit on unencrypted messages is 0.

   The KEY_PHASE bit on the public flags is the most significant bit
   (0x80).

   The KEY_PHASE bit allows a recipient to detect a change in keying
   material without needing to receive the message that triggers the
   change.  This avoids head-of-line blocking around transitions between
   keys without relying on trial decryption.

   The following transitions are defined:

   o  The client transitions to using 0-RTT keys after sending the
      ClientHello.  This causes the KEY_PHASE bit on packets sent by the
      client to be set to 1.

   o  The server transitions to using 0-RTT keys before sending the
      ServerHello, but only if the early data from the client is
      accepted.  This transition causes the KEY_PHASE bit on packets
      sent by the server to be set to 1.  If the server rejects 0-RTT
      data, the server's handshake messages are sent without QUIC-level
      record protection with a KEY_PHASE of 0.  TLS handshake messages
      will still be protected by TLS record protection based on the TLS
      handshake traffic keys.






Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   o  The server transitions to using 1-RTT keys after sending its
      Finished message.  This causes the KEY_PHASE bit to be set to 0 if
      early data was accepted, and 1 if the server rejected early data.

   o  The client transitions to 1-RTT keys after sending its Finished
      message.  Subsequent messages from the client will then have a
      KEY_PHASE of 0 if 0-RTT data was sent, and 1 otherwise.

   o  Both peers start sending messages protected by a new key
      immediately after sending a TLS KeyUpdate message.  The value of
      the KEY_PHASE bit is changed each time.

   At each point, both keying material (see Section 4.3) and the the
   AEAD function used by TLS is interchanged with the values that are
   currently in use for protecting outbound packets.  Once a change of
   keys has been made, packets with higher sequence numbers MUST use the
   new keying material until a newer set of keys (and AEAD) are used.

   Once a packet protected by a new key has been received, a recipient
   SHOULD retain the previous keys for a short period.  Retaining old
   keys allows the recipient to decode reordered packets around a change
   in keys.  Keys SHOULD be discarded when an endpoints has received all
   packets with sequence numbers lower than the lowest sequence number
   used for the new key, or when it determines that reordering of those
   packets is unlikely.

   The KEY_PHASE bit does not indicate which keys are in use.  Depending
   on whether 0-RTT data was sent and accepted, packets protected with
   keys derived from the same secret might be marked with different
   KEY_PHASE values.

   Once the TLS handshake is complete, the KEY_PHASE bit allows for the
   processing of messages without having to receive the TLS KeyUpdate
   message that triggers the key update.  As required by TLS, only one
   key update can be in progress at a time and each peer cannot initiate
   a new key update until it has received a matching KeyUpdate message.
   This ensures that a peer cannot initiate two consecutive updates,
   which could be undetectable based on the KEY_PHASE bit.

4.2.  Retransmission of TLS Handshake Messages

   TLS handshake messages need to be retransmitted with the same level
   of cryptographic protection that was originally used to protect them.
   A client would be unable to decrypt retransmissions of a server's
   handshake messages that are protected using the application data
   keys, since the calculation of the application data keys depend on
   the contents of the handshake messages.




Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   This restriction means the creation of an exception to the
   requirement to always use new keys for sending once they are
   available.  A server MUST mark the retransmitted handshake messages
   with the same KEY_PHASE as the original messages.

   This prevents a server from sending KeyUpdate messages until it has
   received the client's Finished message.  Otherwise, packets protected
   by the updated keys could be confused for retransmissions of
   handshake messages.

4.3.  QUIC Key Expansion

   The following table shows QUIC keys, when they are generated and the
   TLS secret from which they are derived:

       +-------+----------------------+----------------------------+
       | Key   | TLS Secret           | Phase                      |
       +-------+----------------------+----------------------------+
       | 0-RTT | early_traffic_secret | "QUIC 0-RTT key expansion" |
       |       |                      |                            |
       | 1-RTT | traffic_secret_N     | "QUIC 1-RTT key expansion" |
       +-------+----------------------+----------------------------+

   0-RTT keys are those keys that are used in resumed connections prior
   to the completion of the TLS handshake.  Data sent using 0-RTT keys
   might be replayed and so has some restructions on its use, see
   Section 5.3.  0-RTT keys are used after sending or receiving a
   ClientHello.

   1-RTT keys are used after the TLS handshake completes.  There are
   potentially multiple sets of 1-RTT keys; new 1-RTT keys are created
   by sending a TLS KeyUpdate message.  1-RTT keys are used after
   sending a Finished or KeyUpdate message.

   The complete key expansion uses the same process for key expansion as
   defined in Section 7.3 of [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13].  For example, the
   Client Write Key for the data sent immediately after sending the TLS
   Finished message is:

      label = "QUIC 1-RTT key expansion, client write key"
      client_write = HKDF-Expand-Label(traffic_secret_0, label,
                                       "", key_length)

   The QUIC record protection initially starts without keying material.
   When the TLS state machine produces the corresponding secret, new
   keys are generated from the TLS connection and used to protect the
   QUIC record protection.




Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   The Authentication Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) [RFC5116]
   function used is the one used by the TLS connection.  For example, if
   TLS is using the TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256, the
   AEAD_AES_128_GCM function is used.

4.4.  QUIC AEAD application

   Regular QUIC packets are protected by an AEAD [RFC5116].  Version
   negotiation and public reset packets are not protected.

   Once TLS has provided a key, the contents of regular QUIC packets
   immediately after any TLS messages have been sent are protected by
   the AEAD selected by TLS.

   The key, K, for the AEAD is either the Client Write Key or the Server
   Write Key, derived as defined in Section 4.3.

   The nonce, N, for the AEAD is formed by combining either the Client
   Write IV or Server Write IV with the sequence numbers.  The 48 bits
   of the reconstructed QUIC sequence number (see Section 4.5) in
   network byte order is left-padded with zeros to the N_MAX parameter
   of the AEAD (see Section 4 of [RFC5116]).  The exclusive OR of the
   padded sequence number and the IV forms the AEAD nonce.

   The associated data, A, for the AEAD is an empty sequence.

   The input plaintext, P, for the AEAD is the contents of the QUIC
   frame following the packet number, as described in
   [I-D.tsvwg-quic-protocol].

   The output ciphertext, C, of the AEAD is transmitted in place of P.

   Prior to TLS providing keys, no record protection is performed and
   the plaintext, P, is transmitted unmodified.

   Note:  QUIC defined a null-encryption that had an additional, hash-
      based checksum for cleartext packets.  This might be added here,
      but it is more complex.

4.5.  Sequence Number Reconstruction

   Each peer maintains a 48-bit sequence number that is incremented with
   every packet that is sent, including retransmissions.  The least
   significant 8-, 16-, 32-, or 48-bits of this number is encoded in the
   QUIC sequence number field in every packet.

   A receiver maintains the same values, but recovers values based on
   the packets it receives.  This is based on the sequence number of



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   packets that it has received.  A simple scheme predicts the receive
   sequence number of an incoming packet by incrementing the sequence
   number of the most recent packet to be successfully decrypted by one
   and expecting the sequence number to be within a range centered on
   that value.

   A more sophisticated algorithm can almost double the search space by
   checking backwards from the most recent sequence for a received (or
   abandoned) packet.  If a packet was received, then the packet
   contains a sequence number that is greater than the most recent
   sequence number.  If no such packet was found, the number is assumed
   to be in the smaller window centered on the next sequence number, as
   in the simpler scheme.

   Note:  QUIC has a single, contiguous sequence number space.  In
      comparison, TLS restarts its sequence number each time that record
      protection keys are changed.  The sequence number restart in TLS
      ensures that a compromise of the current traffic keys does not
      allow an attacker to truncate the data that is sent after a key
      update by sending additional packets under the old key (causing
      new packets to be discarded).  QUIC does not assume a reliable
      transport and is therefore required to handle attacks where
      packets are dropped in other ways.  TLS maintains a separate
      sequence number that is used for record protection on the
      connection that is hosted on stream 1.  This sequence number is
      reset according to the rules in the TLS protocol.

5.  Pre-handshake QUIC Messages

   Implementations MUST NOT exchange data on any stream other than
   stream 1 prior to the completion of the TLS handshake.  However, QUIC
   requires the use of several types of frame for managing loss
   detection and recovery.  In addition, it might be useful to use the
   data acquired during the exchange of unauthenticated messages for
   congestion management.

   The actions that a peer takes as a result of receiving an
   unauthenticated packet needs tobe limited.  In particular, state
   established by these packets cannot be retained once record
   protection commences.

   There are several approaches possible for dealing with
   unauthenticated packets prior to handshake completion:

   o  discard and ignore them

   o  use them, but reset any state that is established once the
      handshake completes



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   o  use them and authenticate them afterwards; failing the handshake
      if they can't be authenticated

   o  save them and use them when they can be properly authenticated

   o  treat them as a fatal error

   Different strategies are appropriate for different types of data.
   This document proposes that all strategies are possible depending on
   the type of message.

   o  Transport parameters and options are made usable and authenticated
      as part of the TLS handshake (see Section 6.2).

   o  Most unprotected messages are treated as fatal errors when
      received except for the small number necessary to permit the
      handshake to complete (see Section 5.1).

   o  Protected packets can either be discarded or saved and later used
      (see Section 5.4).

5.1.  Unprotected Frames Prior to Handshake Completion

   This section describes the handling of messages that are sent and
   received prior to the completion of the TLS handshake.

   Sending and receiving unprotected messages is hazardous.  Unless
   expressly permitted, receipt of an unprotected message of any kind
   MUST be treated as a fatal error.

5.1.1.  STREAM Frames

   "STREAM" frames for stream 1 are permitted.  These carry the TLS
   handshake messages.

   Receiving unprotected "STREAM" frames or unprotected "STREAM" frames
   for other streams MUST be treated as a fatal error.

   Issue:  Is it possible to send a "STREAM" frame for stream 1 that
      contains no data?  Is this detectable?  Does it comprise an
      attack?  For instance, could an attacker inject a frame that
      appears to contain TLS application data?

5.1.2.  ACK Frames

   "ACK" frames are permitted prior to the handshake being complete.
   However, an unauthenticated "ACK" frame can only be used to obtain
   NACK ranges.  Timestamps MUST NOT be included in an unprotected ACK



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   frame, since these might be modified by an attacker with the intent
   of altering congestion control response.  Information on FEC-revived
   packets is redundant, since use of FEC in this phase is prohibited.

   "ACK" frames MAY be sent a second time once record protection is
   enabled.  Once protected, timestamps can be included.

   Editor's Note:  This prohibition might be a little too strong, but
      this is the only obviously safe option.  If the amount of damage
      that an attacker can do by modifying timestamps is limited, then
      it might be OK to permit the inclusion of timestamps.  Note that
      an attacker need not be on-path to inject an ACK.

5.1.3.  WINDOW_UPDATE Frames

   "WINDOW_UPDATE" frames MUST NOT be sent unprotected.

   Though data is exchanged on stream 1, the initial flow control window
   is is sufficiently large to allow the TLS handshake to complete.
   However, this limits the maximum size of the TLS handshake.  This is
   unlikely to cause issues unless a server or client provides an
   abnormally large certificate chain.

   Stream 1 is exempt from the connection-level flow control window.

5.1.4.  FEC Packets

   FEC packets MUST NOT be sent prior to completing the TLS handshake.
   Endpoints MUST treat receipt of an unprotected FEC packet as a fatal
   error.

5.2.  Denial of Service with Unprotected Packets

   Accepting unprotected - specifically unauthenticated - packets
   presents a denial of service risk to endpoints.  An attacker that is
   able to inject unprotected packets can cause a recipient to drop even
   protected packets with a matching sequence number.  The spurious
   packet shadows the genuine packet, causing the genuine packet to be
   ignored as redundant.

   Once the TLS handshake is complete, both peers MUST ignore
   unprotected packets.  The handshake is complete when the server
   receives a client's Finished message and when a client receives an
   acknowledgement that their Finished message was received.  From that
   point onward, unprotected messages can be safely dropped.  Note that
   the client could retransmit its Finished message to the server, so
   the server cannot reject such a message.




Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   Since only TLS handshake packets and acknowledgments are sent in the
   clear, an attacker is able to force implementations to rely on
   retransmission for packets that are lost or shadowed.  Thus, an
   attacker that intends to deny service to an endpoint has to drop or
   shadow protected packets in order to ensure that their victim
   continues to accept unprotected packets.  The ability to shadow
   packets means that an attacker does not need to be on path.

   ISSUE:  This would not be an issue if QUIC had a randomized starting
      sequence number.  If we choose to randomize, we fix this problem
      and reduce the denial of service exposure to on-path attackers.
      The only possible problem is in authenticating the initial value,
      so that peers can be sure that they haven't missed an initial
      message.

   In addition to denying endpoints messages, an attacker to generate
   packets that cause no state change in a recipient.  See Section 7.2
   for a discussion of these risks.

   To avoid receiving TLS packets that contain no useful data, a TLS
   implementation MUST reject empty TLS handshake records and any record
   that is not permitted by the TLS state machine.  Any TLS application
   data or alerts - other than a single end_of_early_data at the
   appropriate time - that is received prior to the end of the handshake
   MUST be treated as a fatal error.

5.3.  Use of 0-RTT Keys

   If 0-RTT keys are available, the lack of replay protection means that
   restrictions on their use are necessary to avoid replay attacks on
   the protocol.

   A client MUST only use 0-RTT keys for the protection of data that is
   idempotent.  A client MAY wish to apply additional restrictions on
   what data it sends prior to the completion of the TLS handshake.  A
   client otherwise treats 0-RTT keys as equivalent to 1-RTT keys.

   A client that has successfully used 0-RTT keys can send 0-RTT data
   until it receives all of the server's handshake messages.  A client
   SHOULD stop sending 0-RTT data if it receives an indication that
   0-RTT data has been rejected.  In addition to a ServerHello without
   an early_data extension, an unprotected handshake message with a
   KEY_PHASE bit set to 0 indicates that 0-RTT data has been rejected.

   A client SHOULD therefore send its end_of_early_data alert after it
   has either received all of the server's handshake messages, or it
   receives an unprotected handshake message.  Alternatively phrased, a
   client is encouraged to use 0-RTT keys until 1-RTT keys become



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   available.  This prevents stalling of the connection and allows the
   client to send continuously.

   A server MUST NOT use 0-RTT keys for anything other than TLS
   handshake messages.  Servers therefore treat packets protected with
   0-RTT keys as equivalent to unprotected packets in determining what
   can be sent.  A server protects handshake messages using the 0-RTT
   key if it decides to accept a 0-RTT key.  A server MUST still include
   the early_data extension in its handshake.

   This prevents a server from responding to a request using 0-RTT.
   This ensures that all application data from the server enjoy forward
   secrecy protection.  However, this results in head-of-line blocking
   at the client because server responses cannot be decrypted until all
   the server's handshake messages are received.

5.4.  Protected Frames Prior to Handshake Completion

   Due to reordering and loss, protected packets might be received by an
   endpoint before the final handshake messages are received.  If these
   can be decrypted successfully, such packets MAY be stored and used
   once the handshake is complete.

   Unless expressly permitted below, encrypted packets MUST NOT be used
   prior to completing the TLS handshake, in particular the receipt of a
   valid Finished message and any authentication of the peer.  If
   packets are processed prior to completion of the handshake, an
   attacker might use the willingness of an implementation to use these
   packets to mount attacks.

   TLS handshake messages are covered by record protection during the
   handshake, once key agreement has completed.  This means that
   protected messages need to be decrypted to determine if they are TLS
   handshake messages or not.  Similarly, "ACK" and "WINDOW_UPDATE"
   frames might be needed to successfully complete the TLS handshake.

   Any timestamps present in "ACK" frames MUST be ignored rather than
   causing a fatal error.  Timestamps on protected frames MAY be saved
   and used once the TLS handshake completes successfully.

   An endpoint MAY save the last protected "WINDOW_UPDATE" frame it
   receives for each stream and apply the values once the TLS handshake
   completes.  Failing to do this might result in temporary stalling of
   affected streams.







Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


6.  QUIC-Specific Additions to the TLS Handshake

   QUIC uses the TLS handshake for more than just negotiation of
   cryptographic parameters.  The TLS handshake validates protocol
   version selection, provides preliminary values for QUIC transport
   parameters, and allows a server to perform return routeability checks
   on clients.

6.1.  Protocol and Version Negotiation

   The QUIC version negotiation mechanism is used to negotiate the
   version of QUIC that is used prior to the completion of the
   handshake.  However, this packet is not authenticated, enabling an
   active attacker to force a version downgrade.

   To ensure that a QUIC version downgrade is not forced by an attacker,
   version information is copied into the TLS handshake, which provides
   integrity protection for the QUIC negotiation.  This does not prevent
   version downgrade during the handshake, though it means that such a
   downgrade causes a handshake failure.

   TBD:  Determine whether we are using ALPN or a new quic_version
      extension and describe that fully.

6.2.  QUIC Extension

   QUIC defines an extension for use with TLS.  That extension defines
   transport-related parameters.  This provides integrity protection for
   these values.  Including these in the TLS handshake also make the
   values that a client sets available to a server one-round trip
   earlier than parameters that are carried in QUIC frames.  This
   document does not define that extension.

6.3.  Source Address Validation

   QUIC implementations describe a source address token.  This is an
   opaque blob that a server might provide to clients when they first
   use a given source address.  The client returns this token in
   subsequent messages as a return routeability check.  That is, the
   client returns this token to prove that it is able to receive packets
   at the source address that it claims.  This prevents the server from
   being used in packet reflection attacks.

   A source address token is opaque and consumed only by the server.
   Therefore it can be included in the TLS 1.3 pre-shared key identifier
   for 0-RTT handshakes.  Servers that use 0-RTT are advised to provide
   new pre-shared key identifiers after every handshake to avoid
   linkability of connections by passive observers.  Clients MUST use a



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   new pre-shared key identifier for every connection that they
   initiate; if no pre-shared key identifier is available, then
   resumption is not possible.

   A server that is under load might include a source address token in
   the cookie extension of a HelloRetryRequest.  (Note: the current
   version of TLS 1.3 does not include the ability to include a cookie
   in HelloRetryRequest.)

7.  Security Considerations

   There are likely to be some real clangers here eventually, but the
   current set of issues is well captured in the relevant sections of
   the main text.

   Never assume that because it isn't in the security considerations
   section it doesn't affect security.  Most of this document does.

7.1.  Packet Reflection Attack Mitigation

   A small ClientHello that results in a large block of handshake
   messages from a server can be used in packet reflection attacks to
   amplify the traffic generated by an attacker.

   Certificate caching [I-D.ietf-tls-cached-info] can reduce the size of
   the server's handshake messages significantly.

   A client SHOULD also pad [RFC7685] its ClientHello to at least 1024
   octets (TBD: tune this value).  A server is less likely to generate a
   packet reflection attack if the data it sends is a small multiple of
   the data it receives.  A server SHOULD use a HelloRetryRequest if the
   size of the handshake messages it sends is likely to exceed the size
   of the ClientHello.

7.2.  Peer Denial of Service

   QUIC, TLS and HTTP/2 all contain a messages that have legitimate uses
   in some contexts, but that can be abused to cause a peer to expend
   processing resources without having any observable impact on the
   state of the connection.  If processing is disproportionately large
   in comparison to the observable effects on bandwidth or state, then
   this allows a peer to exhaust processing capacity without
   consequence.

   While there are legitimate uses for some redundant packets,
   implementations SHOULD track redundant packets and treat excessive
   volumes of them as indicative of an attack.




Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  Yet.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13]
              Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", draft-ietf-tls-tls13-12 (work in progress),
              March 2016.

   [I-D.tsvwg-quic-protocol]
              Hamilton, R., Iyengar, J., Swett, I., and A. Wilk, "QUIC:
              A UDP-Based Secure and Reliable Transport for HTTP/2",
              draft-tsvwg-quic-protocol-02 (work in progress), January
              2016.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5116]  McGrew, D., "An Interface and Algorithms for Authenticated
              Encryption", RFC 5116, DOI 10.17487/RFC5116, January 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5116>.

   [RFC7301]  Friedl, S., Popov, A., Langley, A., and E. Stephan,
              "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Application-Layer Protocol
              Negotiation Extension", RFC 7301, DOI 10.17487/RFC7301,
              July 2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7301>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-tls-cached-info]
              Santesson, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Cached Information Extension", draft-ietf-tls-
              cached-info-23 (work in progress), May 2016.

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, DOI 10.17487/RFC0793, September 1981,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc793>.

   [RFC7230]  Fielding, R., Ed. and J. Reschke, Ed., "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and Routing",
              RFC 7230, DOI 10.17487/RFC7230, June 2014,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7230>.



Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                QUIC over TLS                     May 2016


   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7258>.

   [RFC7540]  Belshe, M., Peon, R., and M. Thomson, Ed., "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol Version 2 (HTTP/2)", RFC 7540,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7540, May 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7540>.

   [RFC7685]  Langley, A., "A Transport Layer Security (TLS) ClientHello
              Padding Extension", RFC 7685, DOI 10.17487/RFC7685,
              October 2015, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7685>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   Christian Huitema's knowledge of QUIC is far better than my own.
   This would be even more inaccurate and useless if not for his
   assistance.  This document has variously benefited from a long series
   of discussions with Jana Iyengar, Adam Langley, Roberto Peon, Eric
   Rescorla, Ian Swett, and likely many others who are merely forgotten
   by a faulty meat computer.

Authors' Addresses

   Martin Thomson
   Mozilla

   Email: martin.thomson@gmail.com


   Ryan Hamilton
   Google

   Email: rch@google.com

















Thomson & Hamilton      Expires November 25, 2016              [Page 20]
